---
layout: post
title: The Challenge of being “A Believer”
description: It is easy to make sure other developers take my code seriously. The
  challenge is trying to offer something deeper than my logical explanations when
  some friend needs hope rather than facts.
image: unique.jpg
date: '2014-08-14T00:00:00-05:00'
tags:
- untagged
author: Fellipe Brito
lang: en
---

![God is not
dead](/assets/images/posts/1795609_10152316502144161_1986893913_n.jpg)

I went to one of the biggest ruby conferences in the world, which happened
last april in Chicago. Everyone who I look up to was there. The best
developers, speakers and entrepreneurs… the brightest and most creative minds
from my community were there to share their thoughts.

I felt really small surrounded by so many good people. Of course, it was a
personal inspiration to get better, study more and to improve myself and my
team’s work quality.

Putting aside all this tech stuff, something caught my attention. As I posted
before here in my blog, I’m a statistics lover. Thus, when I saw that they had
a yearly survey used to measure different aspects of our community, I promptly
filled it and checked the last years results to verify. [Ruby
Stats](http://www.ruby-survey.com/stats).

A lot of tech data grabbed my attention, I talk about them every blue moon in
my other blog (the one I use to write about code
<http://code.fellipebrito.com/>]). However, in this post I’d like to talk
about something else: **“What are your religious beliefs?”**. These numbers
are shocking for a country that is considered a christian one:

  * back in 2012 we were **19%** monotheists, a decrease of **4% **since 2009.
  * also in 2012 we were **68%** atheists or agnostics, an increase of **6% **since 2008.

This year, in a small event with approximately 40 tech professionals that
sometimes share the same project I work on, I was the only one to answer the
“spiritual status” as: **I’m a believer**

When I defined this situation as a
[“challenge”](https://twitter.com/fellipeeduardo/status/459763556112535554), I
received an amazing question from [Roy](https://twitter.com/roy) about what
would be “so challenging”. I have to admit that his question made this
challenge even bigger. I will try to explain myself in the next lines.

What one can feel from most of conversations, blog articles and social media
posts, is that it is a good “status” to be an atheist or agnostic. It is a
synonym of being smart. Paraphrasing what Descartes said, “ _I’m smart,
therefore I’m atheist”._

I made an experiment, sending a text message to all my contact friends saying
“God is not dead”, I picked two answers that I received to show my point:

  * If he’s not, he certainly doesn’t give a shit about Brazil;
  * That’s not what Nietzsche said.

The countless evangelical churches affirmations and their catastrophic acts in
the last 50 years make this even worse. We can certainly affirm that a
believer’s brain is smaller than Homer Simpson’s brain.

Of course I forced a little bit in the above two sentences, but, mutatis
mutandis, that’s exactly what we see “being thought out loud” in every social
media thread.

While I was shocked with the conference survey results, other folks celebrated
it: “I love to see #atheism winning in the #ruby community :: #railsconf
#NonFiction #Science #Facts”
[<https://twitter.com/chrishough/status/459767149918052352>].

I’m always trying to live my faith. I am almost sure 100% of my friends and
colleagues heard at least once about my faith. Often I share my faith details
with close friends. And I try to answer everyone whenever someone asks me why
do I believe.

I really respect most of these folks. They are capable professionals and
entrepreneurs. Excellent people from whom I can always learn something new,
and it is always challenging to share with them why I believe in the crucified
carpenter, in the incarnate God, in the Genesis and in the final judgement.

Not a few times I took notes from their logical questions and I found myself
researching the answers with people who are more experienced and smarter than
me.

I’m far away from requesting everyone to follow my religion. And I’m positive
I don’t have the answer for every question ( _Maybe 42? #nerd_ )

However, living in a world with no faith and no post-life hope; In a fully of
reasoning and fact-based community; In an environment where you can fix any
issue with some logical cod;. In a country where suicide numbers get higher
and higher; In a society where a neighbor is importante just in case he or she
can give you something back… I feel myself challenged to continue to be a
believer and share it.

So, answering Roy’s question: ”What’s the challenge you’re facing exactly? Do
others not take your code seriously?”

It is easy to make sure other developers take my code seriously when my
projects are reporting both simplecov 100% code coverage and CodeClimate an A
grade.

What is challenging here, is trying to offer something deeper than my logical
explanations when some friend needs hope rather than facts.

It is challenging to be a living evidence from something that is everyday more
outdated, a proof of “lack of intelligence” and considered to be a
“superstition” .

It is challenging to be a spicy seasoning in a world that prefers “3 minutes,
pre made recipes”.

_The challenge, as was brilliantly interpreted by Jodie Foster, in the movie
who adapted Carl Sagan’s book “Contact”, is to try to be quiet…_

_“Because I can’t. I… had an experience… I can’t prove it, I can’t even
explain it, but everything that I know as a human being, everything that I am
tells me that it was real! I was given something wonderful, something that
changed me forever… A vision… of the universe, that tells us, undeniably, how
tiny, and insignificant and how… rare, and precious we all are! A vision that
tells us that we belong to something that is greater then ourselves, that we
are *not*, that none of us are alone! I wish… I… could share that… I wish,
that everyone, if only for one… moment, could feel… that awe, and humility,
and hope. But… **That continues to be my challenge**.”_

