---
layout: post
title: The Case for christian skepticism
description: “Unless I see the nail holes in his hands, put my finger in the nail
  holes, and stick my hand in his side, I won’t believe it.
image: thomas.jpg
date: '2018-03-04T00:00:00-06:00'
tags:
- apologetica
author: Fellipe Brito
lang: en
---

### A skeptical from the get-go

Thomas was one of Jesus's twelve disciples, and even if you have just a
shallow knowledge of Christian literature, you probably know that Thomas was a
skeptic who refused to believe without direct personal experience. This could
easily be Thomas' nickname: The skeptic disciple.

Even before the infamous day when Thomas doubted the reality of the
resurrection, the accounts already make it clear that he was not a man who
accepted any kind of explanation. Take for example this piece of an account of
a conversation between the disciples and Jesus.

Jesus said: - _“Don’t let this rattle you. You trust God, don’t you? Trust me.
There is plenty of room for you in my Father’s home… I’m on my way to get your
room ready, I’ll come back and get you so you can live where I live. And you
already know the road I’m taking.”_ \- John 14

Thomas said: _“Master, we have no idea where you’re going. How do you expect
us to know the road?”_ John 14

Instead of taking blindly what Jesus was saying, he questions it. He makes it
clear that either what Jesus said was not true, or at least, it didn't make
sense to him. If you, like me, like to ask “Why?”, You will be grateful to
Thomas and his skeptical way of facing the world.

Thomas was not in the same room with the disciples when Jesus first appeared
to them after his death, so, when they told him what happened, of course his
reply was: _ **“Unless I see the nail holes in his hands, put my finger in the
nail holes, and stick my hand in his side, I won’t believe it.”** _ John 20

It was not enough for him to just see the body of someone who looked like
Jesus. He wanted to touch the wounds! Quickly his critics scream: "What a
stubborn skeptic!"

But think about it, aren't you happy that at least one of them didn't accept
the rumors as truth without pausing to ponder the implication of what was
being said? Someone who knew how to value proofs and evidence above mere
sentimentality? Someone who knew that wounds like these could not be faked
and, therefore, refused to accept anything less than to touch them?

If you have trouble believing in the resurrection, you are in good company.
The resurrection story includes many people who doubted it too - Jesus's close
friends, his brothers, his Greek and Roman contemporaries and countless Jews.
Let's look at some examples from the eyewitness accounts.

According to Luke, the first time the disciples heard that Jesus had risen
_**“the apostles didn’t believe a word of it, thought they were making it all
up.”**_ Luke 24

That's exactly what you just read! Thomas was not the only one to doubt it.
All the disciples, hearing the report that Jesus rose from the dead, thought
that it was nonsense, that the women were making it up. Even Peter, who would
later become the leader of the Christian movement, did not believe at first:
_**“… Peter jumped to his feet and ran to the tomb. He stooped to look in and
saw a few grave clothes, that’s all. He walked away puzzled, shaking his
head…”**_ Luke 24

His answer is like mine, skeptical. He runs off to see for himself because he
did not accept to believe what only others had seen, and when he sees it, the
empty tomb, he walks away... puzzled... shaking his head!

They all question the report. Their faith is tested. And it is just the
beginning of their doubts.

Look for example, how Mary Magdalene, one of the closest followers of Jesus
behaves: _**“Mary stood outside the tomb weeping. As she wept, she knelt to
look into the tomb and saw two angels sitting there, dressed in white, one at
the head, the other at the foot of where Jesus’s body had been laid. They said
to her, “Woman, why do you weep?” “They took my Master,” she said, “and I
don’t know where they put him… thinking that he was the gardener, said, “Sir,
if you took him, tell me where you put him so I can care for him.”’.**_ John
20

Mary's first thought is not that a miracle happened and Jesus was resurrected,
but that although the tomb was empty, the most logical explanation was that
someone had stolen the body.

The resurrection was as unlikely for Mary and the disciples at that time as it
is unlikely for you today. Don't let your prejudice rate the people of that
time as primitive and naive just because you live in the post-Enlightenment
era. Make no mistake, even if we do not take into account the science of the
time, there was neither a philosophical nor theological basis for a first
century Jew to believe that anyone could be resurrected [1].

According to Luke, some of the disciples did not believe it, even after seeing
him alive, in front of them! _**“…Jesus appeared to them and said, “Peace be
with you.” They thought they were seeing a ghost and were scared half to
death. He continued with them, “Don’t be upset, and don’t let all these
doubting questions take over. Look at my hands; look at my feet—it’s really
me. Touch me. Look me over from head to toe. A ghost doesn’t have muscle and
bone like this.” As he said this, he showed them his hands and feet. They
still couldn’t believe what they were seeing.”**_ Luke 24

At no time does the compiler of these events, be it Luke, Mark or John, try to
force you to accept everything they are talking about without reasoning or
questioning. They are the first to make it clear that, according to the
reports of the eyewitnesses, most of them had some trouble in accepting what
happened in the days after the crucifixion.

* * *

### Every story, like all knowledge, depends on testimonies of eyewitnesses.

Historically speaking, eyewitnesses testimonies are one of the best way to
access historical events. The gospels, in turn, are a collection of
eyewitnesses testimonies. This is not to say that they are a testimony rather
than history. This means that the type of historiography they are is
testimony.

> Trusting a testimony is not an irrational act of faith that leaves critical
> and rational thinking behind.

For a moment, try to put yourself in Thomas's shoes. If you had spent the last
three years living with Jesus, if you could easily recognize his way of
speaking and walking, if you'd also be able to recognize his Galilean accent,
if you had seen his miracles and witnessed his death. Then suddenly you start
to hear from close friends, people that you trust, that Jesus came back from
death - Wouldn't you also doubt it? Wouldn't you ask for proof? I would
definitely do it.

Now, put yourself in Jesus's shoes. You've spent all this time with Thomas,
you've invested everything you had on him, you prayed nonstop for him, you've
told him several times about the imminence of your death and resurrection and
then, when you come back, he doubts you. Even after the other ten disciples
assured him that they saw you resurrected and that you sat and ate fish with
them. How would you behave? Would your patience be exhausted? I know myself; I
know what I would have done. I would have used Thomas as an example of what
not to do, I'd have scolded him and disappeared without using the door to get
out.

### God gave us a mind to think

That is not what Jesus does. On the contrary. Jesus makes room for the doubts
of the disciples, and later he does the same for Thomas, as we can read on the
account of the eyewitnesses: _**“Don’t be upset, and don’t let all these
doubting questions take over. Look at my hands; look at my feet—it’s really
me. Touch me. Look me over from head to toe. A ghost doesn’t have muscle and
bone like this.” As he said this, he showed them his hands and feet.” – Luke
24; and days later, when he met Thomas, he said: “Take your finger and examine
my hands. Take your hand and stick it in my side. Believe!”**_ John 20

Jesus's invitation was never for you to put aside your reasoning and take a
blind leap of faith. No! He invites you to sit with him and touch him. The
written accounts of the eyewitnesses do not use a fable language. They are not
an epic tale. There is no attempt to narrate a Jesus who could fly, or who
took revenge killing all his enemies, or who had his body magically healed
from all wounds. Neither they try to show us disciples who did not hesitate to
believe the story. On the contrary, the accounts are simple - just a bare, raw
account of the facts.

For those of us who are skeptical and have a hard time believing, Jesus is
ready to hear our questions. If you identify with Thomas. If you have doubts
about the resurrection, you are in good company. Jesus understands your doubts
and he welcomes them.

* * *

Much more information is needed to corroborate my statement above. This text
is not intended to be an in-depth study of the Jewish worldview in the first
century. There is plenty written in this blog (most in portuguese) and some
book references that you can see bellow

* * *

#### Sources:

  * [The Resurrection of the Son of God - NT Wright](https://www.amazon.com/Resurrection-Christian-Origins-Question-Vol/dp/0800626796)
  * [Jesus and the Eyewitnesses - Richard Bauckham](https://www.amazon.com/Jesus-Eyewitnesses-Gospels-Eyewitness-Testimony/dp/0802863906)
  * [Raised?: Finding Jesus by Doubting the Resurrection - Jonathan Dodson and Brad Watson](https://www.amazon.com/Raised-Finding-Jesus-Doubting-Resurrection/dp/0310517354)

